Docs for spatial filtering (#536)
koordinates/kart: docs/SPATIAL_FILTERING.md

Spatial Filtering
-----------------

> Starting with Kart 0.11.0, Kart supports spatially-filtered repositories. This is a Kart repository with an extra attached geometry describing a region that the user is interested in - any features that intersect that geometry are said to match the spatial filter, and they are shown. Conversely any features that do not intersect with it do not
> match, and are hidden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Kart 0.11.0, Kart supports spatially-filtered repositories. This is a Kart repository with an extra attached geometry describing a region that the user is interested in - any features that intersect that geometry are said to match the spatial filter, and they are shown in the working copy. Conversely any features that do not intersect with it do not match, and are hidden from the working copy.
```

> Spatial filtering has two main benefits:
> 
> - Saves time, bandwidth, and disk space when cloning a repo and creating a working copy, by only downloading matching features.
> - Saves time loading the working copy into an editor and saves time for the user to focus in on their area of interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When users are dealing with large (state/national/global) datasets with a smaller area of interest, using spatial filtering provides two main benefits:

- Saves time, bandwidth, and disk space when cloning a repo and creating a working copy, by only downloading matching features.
- Saves time loading the working copy into editors, minimising the amount of data applications need to deal with.

When working with small datasets the additional overhead of applying a filter will likely outweigh any performance gains, particularly for fetches over a network.
```

The spatial filter is applied in three different ways:

> 1. Only features that match the spatial filter are cloned during a `kart clone`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Only features that match the spatial filter are cloned during a `kart clone` and fetched via `kart fetch`.
```

2. Kart commands that output features only output the features that match the spatial filter.
3. The working copy is only populated with features that match the spatial filter.

> All three of these ways have some additional complexity, which will be explained in the following three sections. If this seems like more detail than you will need, skip ahead to learn how to [set the spatial filter](#Setting-the-spatial-filter)

Reviewer: Move "Usage" up here, and put implementation details afterwards?

Author: Done

### During clone

Spatial filtering during a `kart clone` is only performed if the spatial filter is supplied up front as part of the clone command. The spatial filter can be changed any time after the clone operation is complete, but at this point the entire repository will already have been cloned and it will be too late to save on download time and bandwidth. Note that none of the cloned data is deleted when changing the spatial filter anytime after cloning. To put this another way:

> 1. During a clone, a spatial filter can be supplied. Only features that match this original spatial filter are cloned. The set of features cloned remains the same from this point onwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. During a clone, a spatial filter can be supplied. Only features that match this original spatial filter are fetched. The set of features cloned remains the same from this point onwards.
```

2. Kart commands only output the features that match the *current* spatial filter, which can be changed at any time.
3. The working copy is only populated with features that match the *current* spatial filter, which can be changed at any time.

As a result, a current limitation is that the spatial filter can be changed at any time, but only to a subset of the filter that was used during the clone. If you need to grow the spatial filter beyond what was originally cloned, the workaround currently is to start again with a fresh clone.

> There are two more qualifications regarding spatial filtering during the clone operation -
> - It is approximate or "best-effort" - some features may be downloaded that are not actually needed. However, since the spatial-filter is applied precisely in the other two stages (Kart command output and working copy creation) this will be hidden from you. The cloned data on disk may contain any number of features that are outside the spatial filter without any adverse effects apart from reduced efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two more qualifications regarding spatial filtering during clone and fetch operations -
- All features that are needed will be downloaded, but some features may be downloaded that are not actually needed. Since the spatial-filter is applied precisely in the other two stages (Kart command output and working copy creation) any extra features will be hidden from you. The cloned data on disk may contain any number of features that are outside the spatial filter without any adverse effects.
```

### Specifying the spatial filter

A spatial filter specification has two parts - the CRS, and the geometry. Specifying the CRS that the spatial filter is specified in is necessary since the spatial filter applies to the entire repository, which could contain a variety of datasets using a variety of CRSs. There are two ways to specify a spatial filter, either inline or by creating a file that contains the specification

#### Inline specification

The inline specification for a spatial filter consists of the name of the CRS, followed by a semicolon, followed by a valid Polygon or Multipolygon encoded using WKT or hex-encoded WKB. It will look something like one or other of the following:

- `EPSG:4326;POLYGON((...))` (WKT)
- `EPSG:4269;01030000...` (hex-encoded WKB)

#### File containing the specification

> The file should contain either the name of the CRS or the entire CRS definition in WKT, followed by a blank line, followed by a valid Polygon or Multipolygon encoded using WKT or hex-encoded WKB. For example:

Reviewer: > followed by a blank line, 

`LF` / `CRLF` / doesn't matter?

Author: Doesn't matter

- `kart clone URL --spatial-filter=@myspatialfilter.txt`

To change the spatial filter at any time after the clone:
- `kart checkout --spatial-filter="EPSG:4326;POLYGON((...))`
- `kart checkout --spatial-filter=@myspatialfilter.txt`

To clear the spatial filter (such that all features match the spatial filter, as happens by default):
- `kart checkout --spatial-filter=none`

The command `kart status` will tell you if a spatial filter is currently active.

### Indexing

Indexing is only useful if you are managing a repository will be cloned by others who will do so using a spatial filter. In this case, you should run the following command to generate a spatial index the repository so that when they clone it, they only receive the features that match the spatial filter. If there is no spatial index, they will instead receive every single feature. As explained above, the resulting repository will still behave as expected - Kart commands and working copy will still be limited precisely according to the spatial filter specified - but they will miss out on the saving of only downloading the required data.

To index a repository, run the following command:

`kart spatial-filter index`

> As more data is added to the repository, running the same command again will index data that has not yet been indexed. Running this command on a semi-regular basis
> as the repository has more data added will help ensure users get the most efficient spatially filtered clones possible, but forgetting to do so has no adverse effects apart from reduced efficiency. This could be automated by using, for instance, the [git post-receive hook](https://git-scm.com/docs/githooks#post-receive).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more data is added to the repository, running the same command again will index data that has not yet been indexed. Running this command on a semi-regular basis as the repository has more data added will help ensure users get the most efficient spatially filtered clones possible, but forgetting to do so has no adverse effects apart from reduced efficiency. This could be automated by using, for instance, the [git post-receive hook](https://git-scm.com/docs/githooks#post-receive).
```

> Indexing is performed on a best effort basis - certain features may fail to index and so these features will be cloned regardless of the spatial filter. This has no adverse effects apart from reduced efficiency and so will not be noticeable as long as these features are few.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing is performed on a best effort basis - certain features may fail to index due to geometry or CRS issues and so these features will always be cloned regardless of any spatial filter. This has no adverse effects apart from reduced efficiency and so will not be noticeable as long as these features aren't numerous.
```

### Current limitations

> - The spatial filter can be changed at any time but it cannot be enlarged beyond the spatial filter that was originally used during `kart clone`.

Reviewer: Should link to the bug describing this

Author: Done

- The spatial filter cannot be set to a geometry that can't be transformed into the CRS for every dataset in the repository.
- Currently indexing isn't very clever with respect to CRS changes. If the CRS for a dataset has been drastically changed at some point, then the index generated for that dataset, although accurate, can be very inefficient, resulting in inefficient clones. (If the CRS is changed but the new CRS is similar to the old one in that the features are all in approximately the same place regardless of which CRS is used to interpret them, then an efficient index will still be generated).

> - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
